Nuclear Energy Advanced Modeling and Simulation (NEAMS) and Integration Product Line (IPL) meeting

May 30 - June 2, 2017

Oak Ridge National Lab

#### <a name="top">Content
1. [Opening](#open)
2. [High-Resolution Time-Resolved...](#time)
3. [Experimental Validation of UO2...](#uo2)
4. [Integrated Nanomechanical...](#nano)
5. [Current Developments in Acceleration...](#accel)
6. [Transient Reactor Physics...](#trans)
7. [Critical Experiments...](#crit)
8. [Thermal Transport and Fracture Behavior...](#tt)
9. [Simulation of Fuel Rod Fragmentation...](#rods)

May 31
1. [Developoment of Transient...](#dev)
2. [MG Transport Xsecs...](#mg)
3. [Nuclear Data...](#data)
4. [Web-based Computational Model...](#model)
5. [Automated Solver Selection...](#auto)

June 1


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*May 30*

### <a name="open">Opening
- Chris Stanek talked a bit about the political context
- Brad gave a NEAMS overview--focusing on laptop simulation through leadership
  class computers; good sense of reality of the context they're operating in.
- the very great codes can be hard to use; so they're making the IPL
- NEAMS has Fuel Product Line (FPL) and Reactors Product Line (RPL), and both
  are hard to use.
- Working to make these easier to use; use high-fidelity simulation to inform
  low-order design tools
- Integrating MOOSE and the ANL codes (PROTEUS, SIGMA, and NEK5000); Warthog
  multiphysics coupling is the thing doing that. 
- DTK will also get brought in here (which, hopefully, will facilitate the long
  term integration of CASL tools as needed)
- I think we need to pay attention to what enables more things to talk to one
  another vs. ending up with only one tool to do each thing (flexibility vs.
  independence vs. redundance)
- NEAMS IPL supports NEUP and SBIR ($150k for phase I and $1M for phase II); looking to make that better


[Index](#top)


### <a name="time"> High‐Resolution Time‐Resolved Experiments on Mixing and
Entrainment of Buoyant Jets in Stratified Environments; Annalisa Manera &
Philippe Bardet
- RANS models over-predict stratification
- LES is likely to be better; need experimental validation to be able to improve
  local predictions
- measuring velocity and density; working to do UQ
- modeling of ternary systems are not well known; excess properties behave
  differently. Looking at measuring these things. Hard to design experiments.
- H2O - Glycerol - 1 Propanol to do proof of principle. 
- the punchline is that you get these density jets; need to have refractive
  index matching for making measurements (I think)
- next up: buoyant jets
- good sets of experimental expertise

[Index](#top)


### <a name="uo2"> Experimental Validation of UO2 Microstructural Evolutions for
NEAMS Tool MARMOT; Yong Yang

(note: presented remotely, a bit hard to see slides) 
- performing experiments to validate grain boundary (GB) migration and GB/pore
  interaction in UO2. Comparing to MARMOT.
- need to understand microstructure for thermal behavior, fission gas release,
  PCI, swelling, etc.
- measuring grain size using ImageJ software (following ASTM E112 stanard)
- grain growth can be calculated with theoretical models; they're looking to
  confirm and to measure the properties that go into those equations.
- adding experimental microstructure data to MARMOT did better matching than
  using Voronoi microstructure as the starting point
- However, MARMOT definiteley isn't right. MARMOT doesn't capture as much growth
  as the experiment found--it's really underestimated.
- Anisotropy is also an issue; did electron backscatter to look into this 
- also looked at grain mobility
- MARMOT predicts slightly lower tilt GB energies, but does pretty well--works
  well for GBs with high symmetry. It doesn't do as well with GBs with low
  symmetry.
- Looking at 3D approaches for the future. Also looking for correlation between
  misorientation angle and annealing to incorporate into MD. 

[Index](#top)


### <a name="nano">Integrated Nanomechanical Raman Spectroscopy and TEM Based
Experimental Data in MOOSE Framework; Vikas Tomar
- looking also at GB, void formation, etc. for cladding
- looking at multiphysical property datasets of nuclear materials based on
  in-situ observations and measurements
- Used FEM comparisons with experiment. 
- MARMOT is easier than BISON to use I think.
(seems like it would be good to get these slides;  I basically didn't pay attention)

[Index](#top)


### <a name="accel">Current Developments in Acceleration Schemes for Neutron
Transport Calculations; Dean Wang
- Galerkin methods based diffusion acceleration schemes in PROTEUS (with Yulong
  Xing (OSU), Tom Downar and Yunlin Xu (Mich), and Emily Shemon (ANL))
- started in MATLAB and then went to PROTEUS
- building up from SN 1D/2D through DG-DSA
- looking at NDA (nonlinear diffusion acceleration) and linear DSA
- use drift coefficient to deal with differences between DE and TE solution
  spaces; should have the same local balance when TE converged.
- stability issues: CMFD, pCMFD, odCMFD
- local refinement (LR)-NDA is their new thing. There's a fine mesh, a coarse mesh, and a local
  mesh. The local mesh is some other mesh where the solve a local boundary
  problem. Do this to get very fine scalar flux? They do fine mesh transport
  sweep, CMFD, and NDA on local refinement areas. I think?
- works well for 1D k-eigenvalue
- overall this seemed to be better than all versions of CMFD; didn't completely
  understand what this new method is doing. Interested in see a paper about this
  so I can see what's really going on.
- They do local refinement in coarse cells at some locations only, I think. They
  can parallelize the LR areas as they're all independent of one another (since
  they're BVPs) 
- they also looked at DSA: works well in 1D, not great in 2D, issues with
  discretization consistency; works well on fxd src. 
- Galerkin DSA: solve DSA on coarse mesh using DG; get local hp adaptivity and
  can parallelize b/c of local compactness

He has a list of references; perhaps from his website?

Also, talk to Jeremy and look up recent work by Warsa; get Jeremy's work

[Index](#top)


### <a name="trans">A Transient Reactor Physics Experiment with High Fidelity
3‐D Flux Measurements; Jeremy Roberts
- UWNR core model being validated by micro pocket fission detectors (MPFDs).
- doing measurements and looking with fiber optics and RTDs
- they've got some initial results; still sorting their electronics and output
  shaping. Seems like they're moving in the right direction. 
- finding good results with serpent; built on top of MCNP model

[Index](#top)


### <a name="crit"> Development of Critical Experiments to Provide Validation Data for Multiphysics; Peter Caracapa
- develop a set of benchmark validation experiments for multiphysics coupling
  between neutronics, TH, and structural mechanics (using SHARP)
- feedback into UQ as well
- using the RPI reactor (very low power, lwr, square lattice, 4.81% fuel, easy
  to modify and reconfigure

(missed most of this talk)

[Index](#top)


### <a name="tt"> Thermal Transport and Fracture Behavior of
 Sintered Fuel Pellets: Experimental Validation of NEAMS Tool MARMOT; Jie Lian
- grain size, porosity/pore distribution, and stoichiometry are key variables
  during sintering of UO2
- oxidation is another challenge
- the results of these experiments will feed be compared to MARMOT
- many inputs; how do we make sure we even have the correct input? They have
  their own uncertainties (some from experimental and some from MD).
- Dakota being used for sensitivity analysis (SA) and UQ
- MARMOT predicted UO2 conductivity pretty well for various grain sizes
- After SA, different value between experiment and prediction, but actually not
  terrible. 
- looks pretty good for MARMOT; feeding back in as well. 
- In the future: looking at fracture models in the MARMOT mesoscale FP code. 

[Index](#top)


### <a name="rods">Simulation of Fuel Rod Fragmentation, Relocation and Ballooning through Peridynamics in MOOSE Framework; Erdogan Madenci; Barry Ganapol
- incorporating peridynamics into MOOSE for mechanics of deformation and
  swelling; diffusion of temperature, and more stuff.
- peridynamics takes nonlocal interactions into effect instead of only local
  interactions as in classical mechanics. 
- have to determine an internal length parameter: that's a bit of a challenge
  b/c then you have to determine what that means. New research has updated that
  the domain of interaction can be arbitrarily shaped and centered.
- pd you get integral equations instead of PDEs
- this is a set of equations and approaches that let you capture deformation,
  cracking, etc. You can also deal with nonlinear materials and complex
  scenarios.
- they can use this for linear PDEs as well as nonlinear PDEs
- doing development for nonuniform domain discretization. 
- pd enables solution of complex field equations in the presence of discontinuities
  and singularities

Barry 
- is looking at benchmarks and validation techniques for these new ideas. 
- Proposing a method for MG scalar flux development so you don't need to have
  the correct function to make the cross sections correctly (keep an eye on
  this). This is using a delta function; it's mathematically valid, but may not
  be better in practice / accuracy. Depends a lot on the group boundaries. Looking
  into a method for how to strategically determine the group boundaries; he hasn't
  actually done it yet.
- He has some 2 group stuff that is interesting

(this stuff looks really cool)

[Index](#top)



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*May 31*

### <a name="dev">Development of Transient Capabilities for
the NEAMS Neutronics Code PROTEUS; Won Sik Yang
- transient solver: Improved Quasi Static method for transient fixed source
  (starting with CMFD in PROTEUS-MOC, added an under-relaxation factor to ease
  the iteration stability needs between MOC and CMFD)
- Couple to thermal hydraulics solver CTF
- Develop supporting cross section API
- Code validation 
- Use domain decomposition with METIS code; was modified to handle the coarse
  mesh
- Coarse mesh decomposition at pin-cell level. Coarse mesh
  and fine mesh boundaries line up. 
- looked at C5G7; also looked at TREAT problem. CMFD was faster; speedups in the
  3-6x range
- for PROTEUS-SN, implicit time discretization; analytic integration of
  precursor eqn. Isotropic approx of time derivative (HOT doesn't change much
  with time is the assumption).
- They had pretty good results overall; esp since PROTEUS wasn't designed for
  thermal reactors.  
- They use DG-FEM they use a pseudo absorption XS to enforce consistency with
  the FEM-based equation

[Index](#top)


### <a name="mg"> Multi‐Group Transport Cross Section and Diffusion Coefficient
Generation for Deterministic Reactor Models Using Monte Carlo Calculations; Kord
Smith
- problems with xsec generation in general; MC can have convergence problems b/c
  of correlation. 
- having multilevel (pin, assembly, core) can cause problems and is very problem
  dependent.
- will boyd developed statistical clustering on xsec gen based on full core MC
  that isn't well converged; use mg data for deterministic
- spatial dancoff factors very relevant for the spectral index and what needs to
  be the xsec
- they're doing machine learning to deduce cross section clusters (look at
  Will's work)
- cluster xsecs, converge when the cluster centers become stationary
- they do better with their more complex xsec gen. 
- need to get transport cross sections to use with diffusion
- cumulative migration method as a way to add up the migration as a function of
  groups, which you then use to get the mg transport cross sections (or group
  diffusion coefficients) [physor 2016; new way at M&C 2017]
- The CMM looks like the in-scatter approximation, of several methods, which
  appears to be the most accurate.
- (for 2g homogenized pwr lattice) serpent uses B1 method, the comparison is to CASMO P1, CMM does well,
  out-scatter does not do well
- homogenized treat lattice, 3D OpenMC vs. 1D diffusion solver: CMM using Dz is
  really close for getting the homogenized diffusion coefficient (need axial
  streaming component for treat)
- future: looking at homogenizing finite lattices; heterogeneous multigroup Dg
- real goal is local pin-wise data.
- looking at super-homogenization (SPH) for equivalence methods; these aren't
  good enough; looking at discontinuity factors for TE

(had to leave for meeting)

[Index](#top)


### <a name="data">The Nuclear Data Working Group: Accomplishments and Goals; Cathy
Romano


[Index](#top)


### <a name="model">Web‐Based Computational Model Builder for Nuclear Energy Advanced
Modeling and Simulation; Sebastien Jourdain


[Index](#top)

### <a name="auto">Automated Solver Selection for Nuclear Engineering Simulations;
Ramachandran Naryanan


[Index](#top)


